EARTHENWARE: Lowfired ware, usually still porous after firing – must be sealed with vitreous glaze to be functional.
EARTHENWARE CLAY: Natural lowfire secondary clay - fluxed with iron, fires porous. Often called "common" clay, found almost everywhere, matures below 2000°F.
PORCELAIN: Midrange/highfire vitreous claybodies containing kaolin, silica, and fluxes, plus often ball clay and/or bentonite for greater plasticity. Usually white or “eggshell” in color, sometimes translucent where thin.
PORCELANEOUS STONEWARE: White-firing stoneware claybodies closely related to porcelain.
CELADON: Classic East-Asian transparent or translucent glaze containing 1-6% iron oxide to give range of soft greens from light to olive, sometimes tending towards blue, gray, or amber. Occasionally show slight opalescence from minute air-bubble inclusions. Contemporary celadons often contain copper and/or chrome to vary quality of green.
CHUN/JUN: A pale gray-blue feldspathic traditional Chinese stoneware glaze featuring opalescence due to inclusions of phosphorous, generally from bone ash.
CRACKLE GLAZE: A glaze designed to craze for decorative effect. See crazing.
CRYSTALLINE GLAZES: Highfire and midrange low-alumina glazes in which significant macrocrystalline structure seeded by zinc forms in glaze surface during cooling. Feature large patches of visible crystals as compared to microcrystalline effects in matt and saturated-iron glazes.
EGYPTIAN PASTE: Self-glazing clay body in which soluble alkaline fluxes effloresce to the surface as the piece dries and form a thin glassy coating in firing.
KAKI: Highfired Japanese saturated iron glaze containing at least 10% iron oxide giving iridescent microcrystalline rust red. See tessha.
MATT GLAZE, MATTE GLAZE: Glaze featuring non-reflective, non-glossy surface.
BEADING GLAZE; BEADED GLAZE: A specialized controlled-crawl glaze designed to crack and contract into isolated islands that melt into beads of glaze on the surface. 
CHINA PAINTS; OVERGLAZE ENAMELS: Very-low-temperature glaze colors applied over a previously-fired higher-temperature glaze. Allow great detail, bright colors, but vulnerable to  surface abrasion in utilitarian ware
SALT FIRING; SALT GLAZE: Vapor-glazing process where moistened salt (sodium chloride) is introduced into kiln firebox at high temperature. Salt vaporizes, and sodium vapor combines with silica in clay surface, forming extremely hard sodium-silicate glaze. See soda firing. Flue exhaust includes hydrogen chloride gas that causes corrosion on nearby metal surfaces.
SATURATED IRON GLAZE: see kaki.
SLIP GLAZE: Glaze with slip clay or earthenware clay contributing primary flux.
TESSHA: Japanese glaze similar to kaki in which re-oxidation and slow cooling give classic kaki iron red but with overall network of small purplish patches of hematite crystals.
SODA FIRING; SODA GLAZE: Vapor-glazing process giving less-invasive/corrosive effects than salt-firing. Gives slightly less orange-peel. Instead of salt, soda ash (sodium carbonate) in water solution is sprayed into kiln at maturing temperature, and sodium vapor combines with silica in clay to form sodium-silicate glaze. Flue exhaust includes sodium hydroxide gas that is highly corrosive to nearby metal surfaces.
AVENTURINE: A glaze featuring iridescent metallic flecks as a result of iron crystals just beneath the surface.
CONTROLLED-CRAWL GLAZE: A glaze designed to crawl as glaze materials shrink into separate patches during drying or early red heat, producing alligator-skin or beaded effect. See crawling, beading glaze.
COPPER RED; FLAMBE; OXBLOOD; SANG DE BOEUF: Midrange and highfire reduction glazes low in alumina with very small percentage of copper that under correct firing conditions gathers into colloidal particles of red copper oxide giving bright red color.



ABSORPTION: The capacity of fired clay to absorb water. Measuring absorption serves as a
gauge of vitrification.
ACIDS: In clay and glaze chemistry, the glass-formers that combine with bases (fluxes) and
neutrals (refractories or stabilizers).
AGATEWARE: Wares featuring swirling marbleized colors resulting from surface slip effects or
use of marbleized colored clays.
ALKALINE: Basic, opposite of acidic - chemical nature of many fluxes.
ALKALINE EARTHS: A category of highfire fluxes that includes calcium, magnesium, barium,
and strontium. Encourage hard, durable surfaces, and matt surfaces in greater amounts.
ALKALINE FLUXES: Major category of fluxes including boron, sodium, potassium, and lithium.
ALUMINA: Aluminum oxide – the primary stabilizer/refractory in clay and glazes.
ALUMINUM SILICATE: Broad category of materials composed primarily of alumina and silica.
Includes raw-materials such as clay and feldspar, as well as fired clay and glaze.
AMORPHOUS: Materials such as glass that have no regular repeating crystalline structure.
ANNEALING: The process of cooling a heated object gradually to allow internal shrinkage stress
to equalize without damage from thermal shock.
ATMOSPHERIC FIRING: Firing processes where glaze surface is deposited by atmosphere within
the kiln, including salt-firing, soda-firing, and woodfiring. See vapor glazing.
ATOMIC VIBRATION; MOLECULAR VIBRATION: Constant motion of all atoms and molecules in
all materials. Application of heat accelerates atomic vibration, eventually causing dissociation
of compound molecules to simpler ones and transition from solid to liquid to gas.
BACK PRESSURE: In a fuel kiln, the internal pressure resulting from proper balance of
combustion pressure and damper setting, resulting in more economical and efficient heatwork.
BALL CLAY: Secondary clays deposited in marshy areas. Very fine particle size, high plasticity,
high drying shrinkage, high in organic contaminates. Fire white or off-white.
BALL MILL: A mechanically revolving vessel for grinding clay and glaze materials to finer
particle size. Ball-mill vessel is filled 1/3 with ceramic and water mixed to flowing consistency
and 1/3 with grinding media (flint pebbles or highfired porcelain balls), and 1/3 empty to
encourage tumbling of contents.
BASALT BODY; BASALT WARE: Clay body with enough content of dark clays and/or metallic
oxides to fire very dark brown or black.
BASES: In glaze chemistry, the fluxes or melting agents that are combined with acids (glassformers) and neutrals (refractories/stabilizers).
BENTONITE: Montmorillonite clay formed from airborne volcanic ash. Finest particles of any
clay, extremely plastic, shrinkage too high to be used alone. 2% to 3% added to clay will
increase plasticity, added to glaze will improve suspension and raw glaze adhesion.
BISQUE-FIRING: Initial kiln firing in which clay sinters without vitrifying, producing porous
wares strong enough to stand up to the glazing process.
BLACK-BODY RADIATION: Phenomenon where any material heated to around 900 degrees
begins to emit infrared radiation.
BLACK-CORING: See carbon-coring.
BLACKWARE FIRING: Bonfiring smothered with organic combustibles such as sawdust or dried,
crushed manure at maximum heat and then buried in sand, dirt, or ash to trap smoke, causing
wares to turn black.
BLISTERING: Glaze defect where fired glaze surface contains bubbles that can break open and
leave sharp-edged craters. Most often caused if volatilization of materials is still occurring
when kiln is shut off, freezing bubbles in place. Solution is allow time for glaze maturation,
including brief soak in oxidation atmosphere at end of firing to allow surface defects to heal.
BLOATING: Firing defect where blisters form within claybody, raising lumps on the surface.
Caused by expansion of gases within clay, as a result of excessive early reduction (trapped
carbon - carbon coring), excessively fast bisque-firing (trapped carbon and sulfur), or over-firing
(volatilization of fluxes).
BODY REDUCTION: Period of reduction atmosphere induced at cone-08 to encourage speckles
in the claybody or at cone-012 to encourage certain glaze effects such as copper reds and
carbon-trap shinos.
BONE CHINA: Translucent porcelain containing bone-ash.
BONE DRY: Completely dry and very brittle state of clay before firing.
BURNISHING: Method of polishing unfired clay or slip by rubbing with smooth hard object.
CALCINE: In ceramics, to heat a material to red heat in order to purify and stabilize by driving
off volatiles including chemically-combined water.
CARBON-CORING; BLACK-CORING: Firing defect where excessively fast bisque-firing and/or
excessive early reduction retard outgassing, trapping carbon within claybody. As clay vitrifies
and becomes pyroplastic, trapped carbon can expand and cause bloating.
CARBON-TRAPPING: Usually purposeful effect where carbon is trapped within surface of the
glaze, giving black or smoky shaded areas, especially in shino glazes higher in sodium fluxes.
Encouraged by starting body reduction at cone-012 and maintaining partial reduction to
maturation, and/or by brushing saturated soda-ash solution over glaze.
CHEMICALLY-COMBINED WATER: Water in molecular combination within clay and glaze
materials, outgasses and escapes from kiln during water-smoking period of firing.
CHINA CLAY: See kaolin.
CLAY: Widely occurring aluminum silicate mineral resulting from natural decomposition of
feldspar, granite, rhyolite, or volcanic ash. Composed of smooth, flat, sub-microscopic
platelets that have affinity for water and give plasticity.
CLAY-GLAZE INTERFACE: Contact face between clay and glaze. On lowfired wares, primarily
just physical interlocking of glaze into pores in clay. In highfired wares, far stronger interaction
of clay and glaze reinforced by mullite crystals.
CLAYBODY: Clay mixture formulated of clays and other ceramic raw materials to give desired
working characteristics.
CMC LIQUID: The common way of adding CMC gum to a glaze or slip. Stir 30 grams of dry CMC
powder in 1 qt. hot water and let sit for 2 days.
COEFFICIENT OF EXPANSION: Measurement of material’s tendency to expand when heated,
contract when cooled. High coefficient of expansion means low thermal-shock-resistance.
Coefficient of expansion of clay and glaze must be compatible. See thermal expansion.
COMBUSTION: Reaction initiated when fuel reaches kindling temperature, at which point
oxidation of hydrocarbon gases releases heat, sustaining and accelerating reaction.
CONE: See PYROMETRIC CONE.
CRACKLE: see crazing.
CRAWLING: Glaze fault where glaze recedes away from an area in the firing, leaving bare clay.
Usually caused by dusty, dirty, or oily surface beneath glaze or by excessively powdery glaze. In
some cases results from very high L.O.I. in glaze materials, causing high glaze-shrinkage and
resulting cracking during firing. Used intentionally in controlled crawl and beading glazes.
CRAZING: Very fine surface cracks in fired glaze surface – technically a flaw that weakens ware,
but often sought-after in crackle glaze.
CRISTOBALITE: Alternate crystalline form of silicon dioxide forming at temperatures above
2200°F from excess silica has not been incorporated into glassy-phase; has very high coefficient
of expansion and thus low thermal-shock-resistance. Aggravated by repeated firing, excessive
soaking, or excessively slow firing/cooling at high temperatures. Adequate balance of feldspar
and silica in claybody combine in glassy-phase, preventing cristobalite formation.
CRYSTALLINE: Solid material characterized by regular repeating geometric molecular structure
or lattice and specific melting point, as compared to glass, an amorphous non-crystalline
material that softens over broad temperature range. See glass, super-cooled liquid.
CULLET: Crushed window or bottle glass occasionally used as glaze material.
DEFLOCCULATE; DEFLOCCULATION: Process of adding alkaline material (deflocculant) to water
suspension to introduce like electrical charges to particles, causing them repel one another and
remain in suspension. A deflocculated suspension flows more easily with less water content
and thus lower drying shrinkage - especially important in slip-casting.
DEVITRIFICATION: Phenomenon that can occur early in the glaze cooling cycle when certain
materials crystallize out of the vitrified glaze.
DISPERSION: Natural effect of molecular vibration causing materials dissolved in liquid
solution to go from area of high concentration to area of lower concentration. In firing this aids
even distribution of dissolved materials throughout glaze melt.
DISPERSOIDS: In glaze-melt, inclusions that disperse throughout the melt without dissolving
into the glassy-phase. Examples are titanium, tin, or zirconium particles, colloidal copper, or
minute air bubbles.
DRAW-RINGS; DRAW TRIALS: In vapor-glaze processes like salt-firing and soda-firing, small
rings of clay formed to stand vertically, placed in kiln just inside spyhole and removed with an
iron rod during firing to gauge degree of glaze deposition.
DUNTING: Traditional term for serious cracking in wares cooling in kiln, resulting from
excessively fast cooling, from extreme glaze-compression, from low-thermal-shock-resistance
in over-vitrified wares resulting from over-fluxing and/or over-firing, or from cristobalite buildup in clay.


ELEMENT: Any of a group of slightly over 100 substances that can theoretically be reduced to
individual atoms and from which all materials on earth are composed. See periodic table of the
elements.
ELEMENTS: In electric kilns, the heating coils.
ENAMELS: see china paints.
ENGOBE: Slip formulated with less plastic clay to give low drying shrinkage, allowing
application to bone-dry or bisque-fired surface before glazing. Commercially-prepared engobes
are called underglazes.
EUTECTIC: Phenomenon where two materials in combination melt at lower temperature than
either by itself. Example: lithium carbonate and silica each melt at cone 32 (3100°F) but
mixture of 55% silica and 45% lithium develops eutectic and melts at cone 06 (1830°F).
FELDSPAR: Category of intrusive igneous aluminum silicate minerals used in highfire
claybodies/glazes, contributing fluxes including potassium, sodium, lithium, and/or calcium.
Parent mineral from which kaolinite clay forms.
FELDSPATHIC: Feldspars or other closely-related minerals including nephylene syenite,
Cornwall stone, etc.
FIRE CLAY: Highly refractory secondary clays with minimal fluxes and usually fairly coarse
particle size - low shrinkage, buff-color, often non-plastic.
FIRING CONE; TARGET CONE: In a cone pack, the cone indicating the target temperature.
FIRING DOWN: Maintaining some heat input after maturation to retard cooling in order to
encourage beneficial crystal-growth or to maintain reduction atmosphere during cooling. See
reduction-cooling, zone of crystallization.
FIRING RAMP: Profile or schedule of heating cycle in a kiln-firing including speed, duration,
soaking periods, often also including cooling ramp.
FLAMEWARE: Wares made to withstand stove-top heat. Explosions from trapped moisture,
and resulting lawsuits have caused most studio potters to abandon flameware.
FLINT: See SILICA
FLOCCULATE; FLOCCULATION: The process of adding acidic substance (flocculant) that gives
particles in suspension opposite electrical charges, causing them to attract one-another (to
flock together) - disadvantage in casting slip but advantage in claybody or decorating slip.
Usually only claybodies high in kaolin need to be flocculated by adding ½ of 1% (of dry batch
weight) Epsom salts. Flocculation also useful to thicken up glaze to keep it in suspension and
improve application properties.
FLUX: Low-melting component in clay or glaze that reacts with silica to form glass.
FRIT: Ceramic materials combined, melted to a glass, ground back to powder in order to
provide raw material with desirable characteristics such as lower toxicity or water insolubility.
FRITTING; FRITTED: Process of melting ceramic materials to glass and grinding to form a frit.
FUSION; FUSED: In glaze-melt, point where dissolution of sintered structure is complete, and
all refractory particles are dissolved into glaze melt, forming fused material – one that has
melted to liquid.
GLASS: Super-cooled liquid that softens and hardens over broad range of temperature and
cools to form amorphous, non-crystalline solid. Level and rate of stiffening (viscosity)
controlled by temperature and addition of fluxes and stiffeners make possible wide
temperature-range of ceramic clays and glazes.
GLASS-FORMER: Primary material that in combination with fluxes forms glass essential to all
fired ceramics. Key glass-former at all temperatures is silica.
GLASSY-PHASE: In heating ceramic materials, point where glass-formers and fluxes combine
and soften to form glass. See glass, sintering, dissolution.
GLAZE: Coating of powdered ceramic materials usually prepared and applied in water
suspension that melts smooth and bonds to clay surface in glaze firing. See clay-glaze
interface.
GLAZE COMPRESSION: In midrange and highfired wares, state of thermal expansion where
clay body shrinks slightly more than glaze, putting glaze under compression. Slight compression 
gives greater strength, resiliency. Inadequate or excessive glaze compression results in defects
including crazing and shivering.
GLAZE-FIRING: Kiln firing in which glazes are melted to form smooth glassy surface.
GLAZE-FIT: Matching of glaze to claybody in terms of composition and coefficient of expansion
so that it will adhere permanently. See glaze-compression, clay-glaze interface.
GLAZE-MELT: During firing, chemically-active state of melted glaze.
GLAZE-RESIST: Decorating technique where resist materials such as wax, tape, adhesive paper
or stickers are applied to prevent glaze from adhering to certain areas.
GLAZE SGRAFFITO: Decorating technique where glaze is carved or incised away to reveal
claybody beneath. A coat of wax before carving helps, and gives the option of brushing or
dipping with a contrasting glaze that will deposit only in carved areas.
GREEN; GREENWARE: Unfired ware whether dry or still damp.
GREEN GLAZING; RAW GLAZING: Glazing leather-hard or bone-dry wares for single firing.
GREEN-PACKING DENSITY; GPD: Distribution of particle sizes in a claybody. Good greenpacking density means broad range of particle sizes resulting in adequate water layers giving
good plasticity, more contact points giving good working structure and dry/bisque strength, and
less water spaces giving lower drying/firing shrinkage.
GROG: Filler or tempering grit formed by grinding highfired clay; added to claybodies to reduce
shrinkage and improve working structure for throwing or handbuilding.
GUARD CONE: In a cone pack, the cone above the firing cone, telling you that you have passed
the target temperature.
GUM ADDITIVES; CMC GUM: Water soluble organic thickeners often added to glazes or slips as
suspension and/or brushing agent. Also used to allow glaze adhesion to non-porous previouslyglaze-fired surfaces. Most commercial lowfire glazes/underglazes contain gum additives.
HALLOYSITE: One of several common clay minerals besides kaolinite; forms from hydrothermal
decomposition of rhyolitic minerals. Rarely used in North America, but elsewhere in porcelain
and bone china. Some halloysite present in Helmer kaolin.
HARD-PASTE: Traditional European term for highfired porcelain.
HEATWORK: Work done by effective heat-transfer to wares, maximized by maintaining proper
back-pressure on fuel kilns, and from temperature, duration, specifics of firing ramp on all kilns.
HEPA: High Efficiency Particulate Arrestance – industrial designation indicating dust filtration
capable of blocking microscopic particulates like silica dust.
HIGHFIRE: High-temperature firing range from cone-8 to cone-12 for stoneware and porcelain.
HYDROCARBON GAS: Combustible gas containing hydrogen and carbon such as LPG or natural
gas or produced when carbon-based liquid or solid fuel is heated above kindling temperature.
HYDROMETER: Laboratory device for measuring specific gravity in liquids. Accurate in thin
suspensions like terra sig, far less accurate in glazes/slips. See specific gravity.
HYDROTHERMAL: Affected by hot water or steam, as in hydrothermal decomposition of rock.
HYGROSCOPIC: The property of absorbing water from the air, as in chips of calcium materials
like plaster, limestone, or marble causing lime-pops. See lime-pops.
INCLUSIONS: Particles or bubbles of material remaining undissolved, suspended within glaze
melt, affecting glaze appearance.
IRON OXIDE: Most abundant coloring material on earth, contributes to brick-red, brown, gray,
and black colors in fired clay, can create green, brown, black, brick-red, orange, and yellow in
minerals and glazes. Red ferric oxide very refractory in oxidation, but in reduction converts to 
black ferrous oxide, a powerful flux.
KAOLIN; CHINA CLAY: Primary clay that fires pure white - coarse particle size, low plasticity,
high-temperature - major component of porcelain and whiteware bodies.
KAOLINITE: Crystalline clay mineral forming basis of most clays, formed by long-term
hydrothermal decomposition of feldspathic minerals.
KILN FURNITURE: Refractory shelves, posts, and stilts used in a kiln to support the wares.
KILN SITTER: Automatic mechanical shut-off device still used on many electric kilns; accepts a
small-size pyrometric cone and shuts off kiln when cone deforms.
KILN WASH: Refractory slip coating applied to top surface of kiln shelf to protect from glaze
runs. For all but salt, soda, wood firings, 50-50 kaolin and silica. For salt, soda, wood, 50
alumina, 40 kaolin, 10 ball clay.
LEATHER-HARD: Condition of clay stiffened but still damp, ideal for joining and most surface
modification and trimming. Soft-leather-hard for forming, joining, thick slip-decorating.
Medium-leather-hard for thin slip-decorating, joining, incising, carving, piercing, trimming.
Hard-leather-hard for thin slip-painting, carving, scraping, green-glazing.
LIMIT FORMULAS: Set of unity formulas giving ideal range of each ceramic oxides that can be 
present in glaze, used in glaze calculation to compare/adjust/design unity formula of glaze.
LINE BLEND: Method for testing glaze materials, where proportional amounts vary through a
series of samples between two limits. May involve change in glaze material or addition of
colorant or modifier. See triaxial blend.
LOSS ON IGNITION; L.O.I.: The portion of any ceramic material, clay, or glaze that volatilizes
and outgasses during firing; includes carbonates, sulfates, nitrates, organic contamination,
chemically combined water.
LOWFIRE: Low-temperature firing range, usually below cone-02 (2048°F), used for most
bisque-firing and for glaze firing earthenware bodies like terracotta.
LOW-MIDRANGE: Firing range usually including cone 01 to cone 3. Under-used in studio
ceramics but useful for functional earthenware, refractory sculpture bodies, and outdoor
earthenware claybodies subjected to hard freeze.
LUSTER: Metallic overglaze finish created by painting prepared luster (metallic salt in organic
binder) over fired glaze and refiring to cone 018.
LYE: Potassium hydroxide or sodium hydroxide. Caustic alkaline soluble that leaches out of
wood ashes in water. Toxic, may cause burns.
M.S.D.S.; MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET, available from your supplier or online giving toxicity
information about each ceramic material you use.
MACROCRYSTALLINE: Glaze effect featuring large patches of visible crystals on glaze surface,
as compared to microcrystalline effects. See crystalline glaze.
MAGIC WATER: Joining medium developed by Lana Wilson, often used by clay workers in place
of slurry for joining wet or soft-leather-hard forms. Combine 1 gallon water, 3 tablespoons
liquid sodium silicate, 1½ teaspoons soda ash.
MAIOLICA: Type of earthenware pottery, generally terracotta, with opaque base glaze and
colored decoration applied directly to unfired glaze surface, not to be confused with majolica.
See faience.
MAJOLICA: Historic English style of brightly glazed earthenware vessels made in the form of
vegetables, barnyard animals, etc., not to be confused with maiolica.
MATURITY; MATURING POINT: Firing point at which a claybody or glaze reaches the desired
state of color, hardness, density, etc.
MICROCRYSTALLINE: Crystal effects dependent on tiny crystals in the glaze surface, as
compared to macrocrystalline effects.
MIDRANGE: Glaze-firing range from cone-4 to cone-7, very popular with electric kilns.
MODIFIERS: Glaze materials not part of base glaze, added to modify surface qualities such as
color or opacity.
MOLECULE: A group of two or more atoms bonded together.
MONTMORILLONITE: Clays such as bentonite formed by hydrothermal decomposition of
volcanic ash. Finest particle-size of all clays, thus very high shrinkage. See bentonite.
MULLITE: Very desirable interlocking needle-like aluminum silicate crystals that form above
1800°F adding strength to highfired vitrified claybodies and to clay-glaze interface.
MULTI-FIRED: Wares subjected to more than one glaze firing to achieve particular surface
effects, as in lusters and china paints.
NEUTRAL ATMOSPHERE: In fuel-burning kiln, atmosphere that is neither oxidizing nor
reducing – most efficient for even temperature climb before body reduction is initiated.
NEUTRALS: In glaze chemistry, the refractories or stabilizers that are combined with bases
(fluxes) and acids (glass-formers).
NON-PLASTICS: Non-clay components of claybody such as feldspar, talc, flint, grog, etc.
NUKA: A milky white Japanese highfire glaze containing rice-hull ash.
OPACIFIER: In glaze formulation, material that introduces inert inclusions or forms crystals in
glaze causing opacity. Most common are tin oxide and zirconium silicate.
OUTGASSING: Escape of gases from clay and glazes during firing. Carbonates, sulfates,
nitrates, organic contaminants, and chemically-combined water volatilize between 900 and
1400°F. Other compounds, especially fluxes can begin to volatilize later during glaze-melt. See
water-smoking period, carbon coring, oxidation cleanup.

OVERGLAZE: Surface decoration applied over glaze surface, either directly on raw unfired glaze
as in maiolica, or on fired glaze and refired to lower temperature, as in china paints.
OXIDE: Simple molecule containing any element along with oxygen.
OXIDE WASH: Mixture of coloring oxide and water, sometimes including a little flux, used as an
overall patina under glaze or without glaze or for overglaze brushwork. See patina.
OXIDIZE: To subject a material to high-oxygen atmosphere, encouraging oxidation reactions.
OXIDATION: Chemical reaction in which atoms or molecules take on oxygen atoms.
OXIDATION CLEANUP; OXIDATION SOAK: After period of reduction in firing, short period of
oxidation to allow outgassing to stop, encouraging bright colors and healing of flaws.
OXIDATION FIRING: Kiln atmosphere maintained with abundance of oxygen to oxidize ceramic
materials. Includes all electric firings, any fuel firing with adequate air to insure quick
combustion of all fuel.
PAPER CLAY: Claybody or slip containing paper pulp that reduces drying shrinkage and
encourages very strong joinery allowing unconventional joinery such as wet to dry.
PAPER CLAY SLURRY: Repair medium that can join bone-dry clay. Combine equal parts finelydivided paper pulp and powdered claybody and add vinegar to achieve desired slurry
consistency. It is essentially “pickled” and will not spoil.
PAPER RESIST: Decoration technique where strips of moist or adhesive paper is adhered to the
surface to resist application of slip or glaze.
PARTIAL REDUCTION; CLIMBING REDUCTION: Slightly-reducing kiln atmosphere to promote
and retain reduced effects while allowing increase in temperature. See reduction firing.
PATE-SUR-PATE: Paste-on-paste - decoration in which sculptural relief decoration is built up
with contrasting slip on surface of leather-hard ware. See Jasper ware.
PATINA: Watered-down wash of glaze, stains, or coloring oxide applied to bisqueware,
allowing color/texture of claybody or slip to show through. Often applied and sponged off high
spots before glazing. See oxide wash.
PEELING: Serious glaze flaw when slip, underglaze, or glaze contracts early in firing and peels
from clay surface in sheets or flake and melts in blobs on clay surface or kiln shelf. Causes
include excessively thick glaze application, very powdery bond with clay surface, surface
contamination (dust, oil, grease, wax), or in rare cases firing that is interrupted and cooled after
sintering but before bonding of clay and glaze and then refired. 
PERIODIC TABLE OF THE ELEMENTS: Table listing all chemical elements in order of atomic
weight and grouped by similar physical/chemical properties.
PHYLOSILLICATES: Minerals with sheet lattice molecular structure that cleave into thin, flat
particles or planes, including kaolin (and other clay minerals), talc, mica, and serpentine.
PINHOLES; PINHOLING: Glaze defect characterized by tiny openings in fired glaze. Causes
include pinholes already present in dry unfired glaze coating, or burst bubbles in glaze surface
not given opportunity to “heal” at end of firing, aggravated by inadequately-high or excessivelyfast bisque-firing that doesn’t allow complete outgassing of volatiles. See oxidation cleanup.
PIT-FIRING: Type of bonfire-firing where wares are buried in sawdust (sometimes along with
chemicals and other materials) in pit in ground, bonfire is built on top, fire and coals slowly
burn away sawdust and fire the wares.
PLASTICITY: Quality of particle adherence and moldable flexibility in damp clay. Superior
plasticity depends on adequate content of small platelets, slight acidity, minimum of nonplastics, age of damp claybody, adequate water content, and/or addition of accessory
plasticizers like Veegum-T or Macaloid. See green-packing density.
PLASTICIZERS: Materials added to some claybodies, especially those high in kaolins, to increase
plasticity and dry strength - includes bentonite, Macaloid, Veegum-T. Also includes range of
industrial organic plasticizers used in some porcelain throwing bodies.
PLATELETS: In ceramics, clay particles. See clay, plasticity.
PLUCKING: Glaze flaw where chips around base of piece remain stuck to kiln shelf when kiln is
unloaded. Can be due to inadequate shelf wash or to glaze residue left in pores of bottom after
glazing. Most often a problem with porcelain bodies, and can usually be eliminated by waxing
feet with alumina-wax resist mixture (1 tsp. alumina to 1 cup wax resist).
POLISHING: Process of creating shiny surface on unfired clay or slip by burnishing or by rubbing
with soft cloth, soft brush, or piece of plastic film. See burnishing, terra sigillata.
POP-OUTS: See lime pops.
POSTS: Refractory column-shaped kiln furniture to support kiln shelves.
PRIMARY CLAYS; RESIDUAL CLAYS: Clays that remain at site of parent rock and are thus free of
contaminants but coarse in particle size and low in plasticity. Includes purest kaolins.
PYROMETER: Temperature gauge connected to thermocouple indicating temperature within
kiln. Provide good general reference but only respond to temperature, whereas clay and glazes
(and cones) are affected by temperature, duration, atmosphere of firing. See pyrometric cones.
PYROMETRIC CONES: Small slender pyramid-shaped indicators formulated to bend at specific
temperature. Standard method for determining progress and maturing temperature of firing.
Like clay and glazes, cones respond to temperature, duration, and atmosphere of firing far
more accurately than mechanical measurement.
PYROPLASTIC; PYROPLASTICITY: Flexibility in clay when heated beyond red heat, resulting
from progressively-developing glassy-phase.
QUARTZ: see silica.
QUARTZ INVERSION: Expansion in heating and corresponding contraction in cooling occurring
in crystalline silica in clay and glazes at around 1063°F. Of primary concern in cooling bisquefiring when most silica is still in crystalline form, but of little concern in midrange or highfiring of
properly designed claybodies and glaze where silica has been incorporated into glassy phase.
RAKU: Traditional Japanese family line, type of ware, and type of firing where tea bowls are
fired singly in small charcoal kiln. In the West, firing process inspired by Japanese raku where
work is removed from kiln at bright red heat and subjected to post-firing smoking.
RAM-PRESSING: Industrial production method where clay is formed in hydraulic ram-press.
RAW GLAZING: See green-glazing.
RE-CRYSTALLIZATION: During initial cooling, formation of microcrystalline or macrocrystalline
structure in glaze surface. See zone of crystallization.
REDUCE: In fuel kilns, to induce reduction.
REDUCING AGENT: In reduction firing, hydrogen and carbon monoxide liberated from
unburned hydrocarbon gases that reduce clay and glazes by lifting oxygen atoms. Or, material
such as silicon carbide in glazes or organic binder in commercial lusters, introduced to create
localized reduction in oxidation firing. See reduction firing.
REDUCTION: Chemical reaction in which oxygen atoms are removed from a compound.
REDUCTION COOLING: In a fuel kiln, maintaining light reduction atmosphere during cooling
cycle, generally from maturing temperature down to 1400°F in order to maximize reduced
effects and minimize re-oxidation. See re-oxidation.
REDUCTION FIRING: In fuel-burning kilns, firing atmosphere with insufficient oxygen to
completely combust fuel, introducing carbon monoxide and hydrogen into kiln as reducing 
agents that extract oxygen from clay and glaze, altering appearance. See partial reduction.
REFRACTORY: Capable of withstanding very high temperatures.
REFRACTORIES: In clay and glazes, see stabilizers. In kiln construction, high-temperature
insulating materials such as firebrick, ceramic fiber, etc.
REGISTRATION MARKS: See keys.
RESIDUAL ASH: In woodfiring, surface effects created by fly-ash settling on the wares.
RESIDUAL CLAYS: See primary clays.
RESIST: Materials such as wax, tape, stickers, or contact paper applied to clay surface to
prevent adhesion of slip or glaze.
RHYOLITE; RHYOLITIC: Category of extrusive igneous rocks high in silica; parent rock of
halloysite clays.
“S”-CRACKS: “S”-shaped cracks appearing in bottom of wheel-thrown pots due to inadequate
compression of bottom and/or excessive water left in bottom. Occur most often in fine-grain
gritless claybodies, especially thrown off the hump.
SAGGER; SAGGAR: Refractory clay enclosure in which wares are fired within kiln, originally to
protect wares from ash-slagging and flame-flashing in woodfiring, but now often used in
clean-burning gas and electric firings for opposite purpose. See sagger-firing.
SAGGER-FIRING: Contemporary firing process in which wares are placed in refractory saggers
within kiln along with chemicals and combustibles in order to achieve certain surface effects.

SAWDUST SMOKING; SAWDUST FIRING: Cosmetic smoking process where unglazed wares are
buried in sawdust in brick enclosure or perforated steel drum. Sawdust is ignited at top and
allowed to smolder down over period of hours. Often mistakenly referred to as pit-firing, but
does not achieve true firing temperatures and wares must be bisque-fired first.
SCUMMING: Gray or white surface discoloration on bisque-fired wares resulting from soluble
sulfates of magnesium and calcium migrating to surface during drying or when wares sit for
prolonged period before firing. Can usually be cured by adding 0.1% to 0.25% (¼ of 1%) barium
carbonate to claybody to render sulfates insoluble.
SECONDARY CLAYS; DEPOSITED CLAYS; SEDIMENTARY CLAYS: Clays that have been
transported away from their point of geologic origins by wind or water. Finer particle-size gives
greater plasticity, but contaminants are introduced – includes earthenware clays, ball clays,
stoneware clays, fireclays, etc.
SECONDARY KAOLINS: Kaolins that have been transported some distance from the parent rock
and are still very pure, but far more plastic than primary kaolins.
SHEET LATTICE: Molecular structure of certain minerals like mica and kaolin that cleave into
thin, flat sheets or particles. See phyllosilicates.
SHINO: Classic Japanese glaze ranging from gray to white to orange containing large
percentage of soda feldspars and often soda ash and/or spodumene. Shinos with less gloss
contain more clay. Orange fire color is achieved with thinner glaze application when fluxes
activate iron content in the claybody or by red clay added to glaze. See carbon-trapping.
SHIVERING: Serious and dangerous glaze defect where excessive glaze-compression causes
small razor-sharp chips of glaze to pop off along outer edges, corners, and rims. Cure is to
slightly increase flux and/or slightly decrease silica in glaze.
SHORT: Clay with insufficient plasticity - tends to fragment during forming.
SHRINKAGE: Permanent contraction of clay in both drying and firing stages. Overall may be as
much as 18%.
SHUTTLE KILN: See car kiln.
SIEVE: Metal or plastic pan with fine-mesh wire screen in bottom opening, available in
different mesh-sizes, used for straining slips and glazes.
SIEVING: The process of working a glaze or slip through a wire-mesh sieve to strain out
impurities, and to break up clumped raw materials.
SILICA; SILICON DIOXIDE; FLINT; QUARTZ: Primary glass-former in clay and glazes.
SILICON CARBIDE: Extremely refractory material used to form kiln shelves. Highly resistant to
corrosive atmospheres and therefore suitable for salt, soda, and woodfiring. Silicon carbide kiln
shelves conduct electricity and should not be used in electric kilns. Occasionally used in 
powdered form as local reducing agent in glazes for oxidation firings.
SINGLE-FIRING; GREEN-FIRING: Process of glaze-firing glazed greenware without a bisquefiring.
SINTERING: In firing, reaction beginning around 900°F where surfaces of particles become
tacky and bond in weak structural mass that can no longer be slaked down to plastic clay.
SINTERED MASS: Any porous mass of particles bonded together at their contact points.
SLAKING; SLAKE DOWN: Process of returning dry unfired clay to slurry by soaking in water.
SLIP: Clay suspended in water, usually the consistency of thick cream. May be colored and
used to decorate surfaces, or may be cast into plaster molds to create ceramic forms.
SLIP-CASTING: Creation of ceramic forms by casting slip in plaster molds.
SLIP CLAY: Naturally-occurring clay containing high enough component of flux (usually iron) to
form glaze at highfire temperatures.

SLIP-RESIST: Decorating technique where resist materials are applied to prevent slip from
adhering to some areas. See resist, wax mishima.
SLIP-TRAILING: Application of decoration to wet or soft-leather-hard clay by flowing on lines of
slip with a fine pointed dispenser such as a rubber bulb or hair-tint bottle.
SLUMP MOLD: Mold over which moist clay slab is slumped in order to create a particular form.
SLUMPING: Process of creating ceramic forms with slump molds.
SLUMPING: Firing defect where glassy-phase begins to dissolve sintered structure in clay,
causing it to sag and deform, usually because of overfiring or excessive flux.
SLURRY: Very thick clay slip, often used for joining clay pieces after scoring surfaces.
SOAK: Period of soaking during firing. See soaking.
SOAKING: During firing or cooling-ramp, holding kiln at particular temperature for period of
time to allow proper formation or maturation of certain clay and/or glaze effects.
SOFTBRICK: See insulating firebrick.
SOFT PASTE PORCELAIN: A white claybody loaded with glassy frit in order to mature at lower
temperature, producing dense, brittle ware. Traditional European term for precursor to true
porcelain.
SOLUTION: A liquid mix where the components are fully dissolved (as in a water/soda ash
solution for vapor-glazing) and materials will not settle out via gravity.
SOLVENT: Agent acting to accelerate dissolution of more resistant material. In clay/glazematuration, flux is solvent on silica, and resulting glassy-phase is solvent on alumina.
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: Weight/density of liquid compared to that of water. Liquid with specific
gravity of 1.2 is 1.2 times as dense as water per unit of measure. See hydrometer.
SPLIT: Specialized hardbrick half the thickness of a standard brick.
SPOOZE: Repair medium for bone-dry greenware originated by Peggy Heer, made of equal
parts vinegar and corn-syrup mixed with dry powdered claybody to desired consistency.
SPRAYING: Application of liquid slip, engobe, glaze, or patina, generally using compressed-airpowered spray equipment. Gives smooth glaze coating but with less glaze-pooling in recesses
unless glaze is allowed to puddle slightly on surface.
SPRAY-BOOTH: Open-front enclosure with an exhaust fan at rear, designed to draw off all
overspray and other dust or fumes.
SPRAY-GUN: Device for spraying glazes, patinas, slips, or underglazes, generally powered by
compressed air. See HVLP.
SPYHOLE; PEEPHOLE: Small holes in kiln door or wall allowing checking of backpressure and
viewing of cones, flames, wares, and/or atmosphere during firing.
STABILIZERS: In clay and glaze chemistry, materials that are resistant to melting and combine
with fluxes and glass-formers to contribute structure in clays and viscosity in glazes. Primary
stabilizer in clays/glazes is alumina.
STAIN: Commercial fritted ceramic colorants giving truer color before firing and greater
stability, firing range, and color range than pure ceramic oxides.
STONEWARE: Highfired vitreous ware, literally as hard as stone. Matures from 2200-2400°F
(cone 5-11).
STONEWARE CLAY: Naturally occurring refractory clay with adequate fluxes to fire in
stoneware temperature range.
SUBTRACTIVE: Removing clay from surface work as forming/decorating method. See additive.
SUSPENSION: A liquid mix where insoluble particles are distributed throughout without
dissolving and may settle out from gravity, as in a glaze or slip.
TARGET CONE: See firing cone.
TEMMOKU: Classic East-Asian high-iron gloss reduction glaze giving black where thick, breaking
to brown or red-brown where thin.
TEMPERING MATERIALS; TEMPER; FILLERS: Grit like sand or grog added to clay to open up
body, give physical structure in wet-working, and increase thermal-shock resistance in initial
firing.
TERRACOTTA: Low temperature, porous earthenware claybody, fires red-brown due to high
iron content that also fluxes clay, making terracotta the most durable of lowfired clays.
TERRA SIGILLATA: Ultra-refined clay slip giving soft sheen when applied to bone-dry ware, and
high gloss if polished or burnished.
THERMAL EXPANSION: Physical expansion and contraction accompanying heating and cooling
of most materials. See coefficient of expansion.
THERMAL SHOCK: Effect on ceramic forms of sudden temperature-change during firing or
subsequent heating and cooling in daily use.
THERMAL-SHOCK RESISTANCE: Resistance to damaging effects of thermal shock.
THERMOCOUPLE: High-temperature probe that generates minute variable electrical current
dependent on level of heat, used with pyrometers and Baso valves.
TRIAXIAL BLEND: Method of testing three-way combinations of glaze materials where
proportional amounts vary through a series of samples between three limits. May involve
change in base-glaze materials or addition of colorants or modifiers. See line blend.
TRIMMING: Removal of excess clay at leather-hard stage using any of a variety of sharp cutting
tools.
TRIMMING CHUCK: See chuck.
TUBE BURNER: Simple tube-shaped atmospheric burner with no venturi effect present.
TUBE KILN: Sequential-firing Korean kiln evolving from Chinese bank kiln with long sloping
tubular firing chamber. See sequential firing.
TUBE-LINING: A slip-decoration technique where high-relief lines of thick slip are trailed from a
squeeze bulb or pastry bag, and often provide a barrier for distinct and separate glazed areas,
giving an effect not unlike stained glass or cloisonné.
UNDERCUT: Flaw in improperly made plaster or bisque molds where a clay pressing or casting
catches under overhang and will not pull free without breaking or distorting. See draft.
UNDERGLAZE: Commercially-prepared engobe. See engobe.
UNDERGLAZE DECORATION: Process of applying decoration (brushed, sprayed, sponged, etc.)
to bare clay surface directly before glazing.
UNDERGLAZE PENCILS: Engobe pigments in pencil form, excellent for marking wares and testtiles and for “pencil-drawn” decorative effects.
UNITY FORMULA; SEGER FORMULA: Formula generated by glaze calculation listing oxides
present in glaze in separate columns for fluxes, refractories, and glass-formers with fluxes
totaling “1” or unity.
UPDRAFT: Kiln in which exhaust gases exit through flue in roof of kiln.
VAPOR GLAZING: Glaze surface resulting from atmospheric firing process where glaze is
deposited by vapors within kiln atmosphere – includes salt-glazing, soda-glazing, fuming.
VENTURI BURNER: Natural-draft gas burner featuring streamlined restriction in burner tube
that increases entrainment of primary air and efficiency of gas-air mixing.
VISCOSITY; VISCOUS: Reference to material’s resistance to flowing. A viscous glaze flows less.
VITREOUS; VITRIFIED; VITRIFICATION: Fired clay that has fused together to point where pores
between refractory particles are filled with glass and body is impervious to water. Vitrified clay
still has sintered structure but with fully-developed glassy-phase.
VITREOUS ENGOBE: An engobe containing sufficient flux to form to a vitreous clay coating.
VOLCANIC ASH: Fine volcanic particulate expelled from surface vent in volcanic eruption.
Occasionally used in glazes and similar to feldspar in composition but usually with significant
iron. Parent mineral of Bentonite clays.
VOLATILIZATION; VOLATILIZE: Change from solid or liquid to gas during firing, resulting in
outgassing from clay or glaze. See outgassing, blistering.
WADS; WADDING: Small balls/rolls of refractory clay mixture (40 alumina, 10 ball clay, 50
kaolin) used in atmospheric firing processes beneath wares, posts, lids to prevent sticking.
WARNING CONE: In a cone pack, the cone below the firing cone, warning that you are close to
target temperature.
WARPING: Distortion of clay forms caused by uneven stresses due to clay memory from
forming method, uneven drying, uneven support in firing, or uneven/excessive heat in firing.
WASH: See patina.
WATER COLUMN INCHES; WCI: Standard low-pressure measure of gas pressure based on
pressure required to lift a column of water in a vertical tube. Household pressure is usually 7
WCI natural gas and 9-11 WCI propane. Industrial natural gas pressure may be 12 to 15 WCI or
more. 28 WCI equals 1 PSI (pounds per square inch). See manometer.
WATER OF PLASTICITY: Amount of water required to bring a dry clay sample to its state of 
ideal plasticity. Common clay test since the more water needed, finer the particle size, greater
the plasticity, greater the drying shrinkage.
WATER SMOKING STAGE: Stage during bisque-firing or single-firing from 900 to 1400°F when
carbonates, nitrates, sulfates, organic contaminants, chemically-combined water volatilize and
outgas. See carbon-coring, outgassing.
WAX RESIST: Melted wax or wax emulsion used in resist processes. See resist.
WCI: See water column inches.
WEDGING: Process of kneading the clay with the hands to remove air-bubbles and insure
homogenous mass.
WHITEWARE: White claybodies fired too low to be considered porcelain.
